Jan 7, 2024
Data Visualization and infographics are not the same thing.
Data Visualizations are used in many fields:
	- Geonomics and Bio, researchers explore DNA sequences, variations, and genes
	- Map crime patterns, identify trends in criminal activity

Tableau and PowerBI make it easy to derive insights from data
DV begins with a question you are seeking to answer
Observation and inference/interpretation are outcomes of DV

Learning Goals:
1) Define data visualization (DV)
2) Explain differences and similarities between DV and infographic
3) Create a visualization based on pre-defined question
4) Observe and interpret the results of DV

Data Visualization == representation of data/information in a graph, chart
or other visual formats.

DV vs Infographic

Purpose:
DV == Represents data in a visual format for analysis and insight
Info == Tell a concise visual story, often simplifying information

Data Complexity:
DV == Used for complex data emphasizing accurate data representation
Info == Simplifies data, presenting key insights in a straightforward manner

Interactivity:
DV == May include interactive elements; allowing users to explore/analyze data
Info == Less interactive; static presentation

Visual Design:
DV == Clarity and accuracy with customizable visualizations
Info == Creative design elements to enhance visual appeal

Narrative Flow:
DV == Focuses on showing patterns and relationships
Info == Sequential flow; guiding the viewer through a story or related facts.

Tools:
DV == Specialized tools like Tableau, PowerBI, Python or D3.js
Info == Graphic design softwares like Adobe, Canva, or Piktochart

Terms in DV
Big Data -> Structured (organized stored in relational database),
semi-structured (json or xml) and unstructured data (text documents, pics,text)

Data Science -> Uses big data and utilizes statistics, ML, domain

Data Visualization -> Graphical analysis of data or communicates results from
data analysis (data science), insight, infos and trends are evident

Infographics -> Visual representations that tells a story

For example in real life we will look at an apple watch

Data Science: uses statistcal algorithms, and models, gathered from sensors
of the apple watch. Using ML, the watch can predict and track users

DV: Provides insights of Data Science allowing users to make informed decisions
such as charts to show current progress in trends

Infographics: Summarizes overall performance, often user-friendly to view

DVs
- Can also tell a story
- Answer a question
- Evoke new questions
- Interpret results

Factors that leads to DV being a popular topic
- Open Data Initiatives
- IoT (internet of things)
- Data Science
- Data Analysis Tools
- Data Democratization
- Data-Driven Culture
- The appeal of storytelling

Types of Data:
OPEN DATA -> makes information more accessible to wider audience, promotes
transparency and collaboration. Often promotes innovations and data driven
decisions.
IoT DATA -> gathers live data for available routes, public safety like
finding emergency vehicles, track city owned vehicles.

Storytelling in DV can help enhance the impact of findings and persuade
stakeholders to take action based on insights. Rapid decision-making could
utilize real-time data to quickly grasp the current state of affairs,
and identify any issues. For example, stock market.

Data Democratization
Open access to data. Data is made available to a broader audience, aligns with
the use of visualization to make data more understandable for non-experts

Data-Driven Decision Culture
Cultural Shift. Visualization serves as a bridge between raw data and
actionable insights, empowering organizations to make informed decisions
based on evidence and analysis.

In-Class exercise: How to use google trends.
1) Search a topic and click explore
2) Apply proper filters (like date range)
3) Analyze spikes, regional areas

Assignment #1: Test out Google Trends

Jan 14, 2025
The overall class was a recap of the online lecture with explanations on
pros/cons of table, bar chart, pie charts. Then the class went over the Google Trends assignment. Overall a recap class with an in-person excercise of pros
and cons of DV on tables and charts.

Jan 21, 2025

Psychology Of Information Design
	Colour Psychology: colours have a psychological impact
	Typography: choosing correct fonts for genre or context
	Visual Hierarachy: Guiding viewer's attention through fonts, size, colour
						and placement

Best practices in Information Design
	Limit numbers
	Consistent layouts
	Show hierarchy; size and positioning
	Clear labels for context; aid understanding

Gestalt Theory
	Brains are built to see structure and patterns to make sense of environment
	Brains are good at detecting patterns and order
	Brains are good at filling in the gaps in an image
	Gestalts usind in DV to improve viewers understing of viz and how to use it

	1) Proximity: elements close together implies they are related
	2) Symmetry: organized and precieved to be calming
	3) Common Region/Enclosure: Create groupings, borders background as a way to organize Consistent

Bar Charts: considered as the "all rounder"
	- Column Charts (good for grouping)
	- Stacked Bar Chart (good for comparing)

Jan 28, 2025

Team Project:
- A team of 3
- Presentation due on March 31
- Choose one option:
	Tell a story using DV. Explain significance of the topic, data reputability, data preprocessing and
	analysis steps, the rationale behind visual choices, and discuss the findings and patterns identified.
	-> OR
	DV platform comparative analysis: Select 2 or more platforms/software products. Consider factors such as data input
	options, available chart types, interactivity/features, collaboration capabilities, cost and tiime
	-> OR
	DV Project or Organization discuss a project or organization that significantly uses DV to inform the world.
	Describe goals of the project/organziation. What visualizers fit. etc
	-> OR
	Data Visualization Applicances
	Create an app of some sort that utilizes DV.
See Additional Guidelines in Team Project Specs

Principles of Effective DV
- Simplicity
- Relevance
- Consistency
- Interactivity
- Storytelling
- Accessibility

6 Steps to DV
1) Start with a question
2) Get your data
3) Pre-process data
4) Analysis
5) Vizualize data
6) Communicate results

7 Qualities of Good Data
1) Completeness
2) Comprehensive
3) Accuracy
4) Precision
5) Legitament & Valid
6) Reliable
7) Consistent

Feb 11, 2025
Today's lecture was just a recap of what the async material was and future team projects

















