Exam #1 Study Sheet

1) What are the differences between pure research, applied research and translational research?
    Basic Research: motivated idea to acquire knowledge
    Applied Research: takes idea to incorporate into clinical field
    Translational Research: utilizes both basic and applied research

2) What is the difference between a homozygous gene and a heterozygous gene?
    homozygous: inherited two identical allels
    heterozygous: inherited different allels

3) What are the phenotypes observed in G1 and G2 after the first and second cross, respectively,
in Mendel's genetic research?
    G1: All dominant traits after first cross (started with true breeding)
    G2: 3:1 ratio of dominant trait
    The phenotype observed were colour and shape

4) How is social dominance among male members of a species related to the evolution of that
species?
    Social structure, Mating Selection, Resource Allocation

5) How did researchers study the evolution of the human brain?
    1) Size of brain. 2) Size to body weight. 3) Cerebrum to size of brain stem
    They also looked at some evolution studies from Darwin:
        - fossils evolve from a common anncestor
        - humans and other animals have replicating structures
        - changes from selective breeding

6) What is the difference between a genotype and a phenotype?
    Genotype are their unique sequence of DNA
    Phenotype are observable appearance

7) How many monomers do DNA and protein have?
    DNA: 4 monomers (A) goes with (T) and (C) goes with (G)
    Protein: 20 monomers

8) What happens during transcription and translation, and where do each of these processes take
place inside the cell?
    Transcription: inside nucleus, DNA to mRNA
    Translation: inside cytoplasm mRNA to protein

9) Explain the findings that were observed from research on the maze-dull and maze-bright rats,
and how experience changed those findings.
    Bright rats and Dull rats were separated testing the basic research of genetic differences
    - They conclude that parental fostering does not impact learning and Genes influence development of behaviour
    They proved that point by setting an enriched and standard environment. Both performed to no difference in 
    an enriched environment while in standard bright rats were noticably more efficient.
    - They also concluded that experience also matter not just genetics for learning.

10) Describe the organizational breakdown of the nervous system.
    Nervous system has two branches: CNS and PNS
    CNS has two leaves: brain and spinal cord
    PNS has two branches: ANS and SNS
    ANS and SNS each have two leaves: afferent and efferent neurons

11) What is the difference between afferent and efferent neurons?
    Afferent: info sent to CNS while efferent is CNS info sent out

12) What do you call a neuron with more than two extensions and none from its cell body?
    multipolar with more than two extensions
    multipolar interneron with no extensions

13) What is the function of the parasympathetic and sympathetic nervous system?
    Parasympathetic: relaxes your body after periods of stress/danger
    Sympathetic: for decision making

14) What is the role of microglia?
    A type of glial cell that responds to injury

15) Which glial cell provides myelination in the central nervous system?
    Oligodendrocytes

16) Which structure does not constitute as being part of the brainstem?
    Cerebral hemisphere, Cerebellum, and diencephalon are not portions of the brainstem

17) What are the functions of the three structures that make up the hindbrain?
    medulla: autonomic functions
    pons: connection to brain and body
    cerebellum: voluntary actions

18) What are the functions of the two structures of the tectum?
    Superior: Visual
    Inferiror: Audiovisual

19) What is the thalamus made of?
    Two connecting lobes and multiple nuclei

20) Describe the structure of the neocortex.
    Has 4 properties
    1) cell type: pyramidal and stellate cells
    2) different layers: size, density, proportions
    3) columnar organization
    4) thickness of layer

21) What is the name of the fissure that separates the frontal lobe from the parietal lobe?
    Central sulcus

22) What are the three structures that make up the basal ganglia?
    Caudate nucleus, globus pallidus, putamen