Jan 10, 2025 - Chapter 1

Textbook: Introduction to Learning Behavior (6th Ed) Wadsworth Cengage Learning
IBSN: 9780357658475

12 weekly quizzes, at the end top 11 will be evaluated.

Fill-in-the-Blanks exercises are optional but will benefit 6% of your grade (Unlimited)

3 Exams are distinctive and will not be carried over.
Short answer questions on exams will come word for word from “select study questions” found in each module online.

At the very latest is 1 week after the due date or grace period.

Exam Dates
Ch1-4 | Feb 5, 2025 6-7:30pm
Ch5-8 | Mar 5, 2025 6-7:30pm
Ch9-12 | Apr 5, 2025 6-7:30pm

Jan 16, 2025

Methoed of Research in Psychology

Plato
"Everything we know is inborn (nativist/nature perspective)"

Aristotle
"Knowledge is acquired through experience (empiricist/nurutre perspective)"

    Four Laws of Association:
    1) Law of Similarity: Connect things that are alike
        (ex. thinking of a cat when we see a lion).
    2) Law of Contrast: Thoughts of one extreme lead to thoughts of its opposite
        (ex. white leads to black).
    3) Law of Contiguity: We link things that happen close together in time or space
        (ex. lightning strike and hearing thunder soon after).
    4) Law of Frequency: The more often two things occur together, the stronger their association
        (ex. two people being together leads to them being close).

Descartes
"Human behaviour are not governed by free-will or reason"
Mind-Body (Cartesian) Dualism
    Mind: Voluntary behaviour
    Body: Involuntary behaviour (injury causes a reaction w/o will)
Only humans have a mind

British Empiricists avocated that all knowledge is due to experience:
    John Locke:
        All ideas are acquired through experience, haphazardly
        Humans are born Tabula Rasa; a clean slate

Structuralism: First scientific study of human experience
    Edward B. Titchener
        Studied the basic elements of conscious experience through a technique called introspection

Funtionalism: Psychology should study the adaptive processes of the mind (asking why)
    William James
        Based on Darwin's theory of evolution
        Study of non-human animals encouraged to give insight into human behaviour

Theory of Evolution
    Provides how changes occur in a species across generations through Natural Selection
    Difference between humans and non-human animals seen as one of degree, not kind.

Behaviourism
    John Watson
        Natural science approach and emphasises the study of environmental influences on observable behaviour
        Psychology should only focus on observables

S-R Theory: Learning involves attaching specific responses to specific stimuli in evnvironment
Behaviour Analyst: basic principles of behaviour
Applied behaviour analyst: applies basic principles to developing better metheods

The Five Schools of Behaviourism
    1) Watson's Methodological Behaviourism
        Mechanistic (molecular) theory of Behaviourism
            An envioronmental event (stimulus) and specific behaviour (response)
        Psychologists should only study environmental influences on behaviours that can be directly observed
        EX: A rat is shocked, so it will try to avoid that area.
    2) Hull's Neobehaviourism
        Intervening variables influence behaviour (feelings influencing behaviour) also molecular
        Internal states like current status alters observable behaviour
        EX: A hungry rat performs differently in a maze than a non-hungry one.
        These things must be objectively identified, so you cannot say the rat is hungry, but can say the rat hasn't
        eaten in 5 days.
    3) Tolman's Cognitive Behaviourism
        Scientists must consider the purpose or goal of an organism to really understand behaviour (current objectives influencing behaviour)
        EX: two hungry rats race to the end of a maze, one is aware of the prize and the other is not, the one that is aware
        will behave differently. Cognitive map. Latent Learning
    4) Bandura's Social Learning Theory
        Cognitive-behavioural approach that emphasizes the role of observational learning and cognitive variables in explaining human behaviour.
        Basically reciprocal determinism or molar theory
        EX: Environmental influences can affect thought and feelings, or thoughts and feelings may influence actions.
    5) Skinner's Radical Behaviourism
        Emphasized the influence of the environment on obserbale behaviour rejects the use of internal events to explain behaviour.
        Only Environmental events can change thoughts and feelings and/or observable behaviour

Behaviour analysis is the basic science that is concerned with investigating principles of behaviour
Applied behaviour analysis is the technology that applies these principles to the practical modification of behaviour in the real world.

Jan 24, 2025 - Chapter 2

Terms and Definitions Related to metheods

Variable: a characteristic of a person, place, or thing, that can change
    independant variable: manipulating
    dependent variable: the measured of the independant

Functional Relationship:
    relationship between changes in an independent variable and dependent variable.
    results in if there is IS or IS NOT

Durand & Carr, 1992
They did a research of study impact of teacher attention in grade school with behavioural issues.
They tested to see if the teacher gives them more attention if it impacted or caused disruption.
They concluded a func relationship that high teacher attention results to no disruptive behaviour

Simulus: Any event that can potentially influence behaviour
Response: A particular instance of behaviour

A stimuli can either be appetitive or aversive
    Appetitive Stimuli: event that an organism will seek out
    Aversive Stimuli: event that an organism will avoid

Motivating Operations: anything that affects the appetivieness or aversiveness of an event
    Establishing Operations (EO): increase the appetivieness or aversiveness of an event
        "makes good things better or bad things worse"
    Abolishing Operations (AO): Decreases the appetitiveness or aversiveness of an event
        "if you ate a bunch of sushi you're likely less want sushi"

Contiguity: Means closeness or nearness
    Temporal: close within time
    Spaital: distance
Contingency: predicitve functional relationship between two events. Probable occurence.

Behavioural (operational):
    - A desctiopn of a property in concrete measurable terms
    - Should be precise, allow quantification, and allow agreement between observers

Recording Methods:
    1) Rate of response: frequency over time
    2) Intensity: force or magnitude of the behaviour
    3) Duration: length of time that the individual repeatedly performs a behaviour
    4) Speed: length in time i takes for an episode of behaviour to occur from start to finish
    5) Latency: the length of time required for a behaviour to begin
    6) Interval recording: whether a behaviour occurs within a series of continuous invervals
    7) Time-sampling Recording: whether a vehaviour occurs within a series of discountinuous intervals
    